REGRESSION ANALYSIS: SOME ADDITIONAL TECHNIQUES

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

This chapter discusses some additional tools and concepts that are useful in
regression analysis. The presentation includes expansions of the basic ideas
and techniques of regression analysis that were introduced in Chapters 9
and 10.

TOPICS

11.1 INTRODUCTION
11.2 QUALITATIVE INDEPENDENT VARIABLES
11.3 VARIABLE SELECTION PROCEDURES
11.4 LOGISTIC REGRESSION
11.5 SUMMARY

LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this chapter, the student will

1. understand how to include qualitative variables in a regression analysis.

2. understand how to use automated variable selection procedures to develop regression models.
3. be able to perform logistic regression for dichotomous and polytomous dependent variables.

11.1 INTRODUCTION

The basic concepts and methodology of regression analysis are covered in Chapters 9
and 10. In Chapter 9 we discuss the situation in which the objective is to obtain an
equation that can be used to make predictions and estimates about some dependent
variable from knowledge of some other single variable that we call the independent,
predictor, or explanatory variable. In Chapter 10 the ideas and techniques learned in
Chapter 9 are expanded to cover the situation in which it is believed that the inclusion
of information on two or more independent variables will yield a better equation for
use in making predictions and estimations. Regression analysis is a complex and pow-
erful statistical tool that is widely employed in health sciences research. To do the sub-
ject justice requires more space than is available in an introductory statistics textbook.
However, for the benefit of those who wish additional coverage of regression analysis,
we present in this chapter some additional topics that should prove helpful to the stu-
dent and practitioner of statistics.

Regression Assumptions Revisited As we learned in Chapters 9 and 10,
there are several assumptions underlying the appropriate use of regression procedures.
Often there are certain measurements that strongly influence the shape of a distribution
or impact the magnitude of the variance of a measured variable. Other times, certain
independent variables that are being used to develop a model are highly correlated, lead-
ing to the development of a model that may not be unique or correct.

Non-Normal Data Many times the data that are used to build a regression model
are not normally distributed. One may wish to explore the possibility that some of the
observed data points are outliers or that they disproportionately affect the distribution of
the data. Such an investigation may be accomplished informally by constructing a scatter
plot and looking for observations that do not seem to fit with the others. Alternatively,
many computer packages produce formal tests to evaluate potential outlying observations
in either the dependent variable or the independent variables. It is always up to the
researcher, however, to justify which observations are to be removed from the data set
prior to analysis.

Often one may wish to attempt a transformation of the data. Mathematical trans-
formations are useful because they do not affect the underlying relationships among
variables. Since hypothesis tests for the regression coefficients are based on normal dis-
tribution statistics, data transformations can sometimes normalize the data to the extent
necessary to perform such tests. Simple transformations, such as taking the square root
of measurements or taking the logarithm of measurements, are quite common.

EXAMPLE 11.1.1

Researchers were interested in blood concentrations of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
()-9-THC), the active psychotropic component in marijuana, from 25 research subjects.
These data are presented in Table 11.1.1, as are these same data after using a log10 transformation.

Box-and-whisker plots from SPSS software for these data are shown in Figure 11.1.1.
The raw data are clearly skewed, and an outlier is identified (observation 25). A log10
transformation, which is often useful for such skewed data, removes the magnitude of
the outlier and results in a distribution that is much more nearly symmetric about the
median. Therefore, the transformed data could be used in lieu of the raw data for con-
structing the regression model. Though symmetric data do not, necessarily, imply that
the data are normal, they do result in a more appropriate model. Formal tests of normal-
ity, as previously mentioned, should always be carried out prior to analysis.


Unequal Error Variances When the variances of the error terms are not equal,
we may obtain a satisfactory equation for the model, but, because the assumption that
the error variances are equal is violated, we will not be able to perform appropriate
hypothesis tests on the model coefficients. Just as was the case in overcoming the
non-normality problem, transformations of the regression variables may reduce the
impact of unequal error variances.


Correlated Independent Variables Multicollinearity is a common problem
that arises when one attempts to build a model using many independent variables.
Multicollinearity occurs when there is a high degree of correlation among the
independent variables. For example, imagine that we want to find an equation relating
height and weight to blood pressure. A common variable that is derived from height
and weight is called the body mass index (BMI). If we attempt to find an equation
relating height, weight, and BMI to blood pressure, we can expect to run into analytical
problems because BMI, by definition, is highly correlated with both height and weight.

The problem arises mathematically when the solutions for the regression coefficients
are derived. Since the data are correlated, solutions may not be found that are unique to a
given model. The least complex solution to multicollinearity is to calculate correlations
among all of the independent variables and to retain only those variables that are not highly
correlated. A conservative rule of thumb to remove redundancy in the data set is to elim-
inate variables that are related to others with a significant correlation coefficient above 0.7.

EXAMPLE 11.1.2

A study of obesity and metabolic syndrome used data collected from 15 students, and
included systolic blood pressure (SBP), weight, and BMI. These data are presented in
Table 11.1.2.

Correlations for the three variables are shown in Figure 11.1.2. The very large and
significant correlation between the variables weight and BMI suggests that including both
of these variables in the model is inappropriate because of the high level of redundancy
in the information provided by these variables. This makes logical sense since BMI is a
function of weight. The researcher is now faced with the task of deciding which of the
variables to retain for constructing the regression model.


11.2 QUALITATIVE INDEPENDENT VARIABLES

The independent variables considered in the discussion in Chapter 10 were all quantita-
tive; that is, they yielded numerical values that were either counts or measurements in
the usual sense of the word. For example, some of the independent variables used in our
examples and exercises were age, education level, collagen porosity, and collagen ten-
sile strength. Frequently, however, it is desirable to use one or more qualitative variables
as independent variables in the regression model. Qualitative variables, it will be recalled,
are those variables whose “values” are categories and that convey the concept of attrib-
ute rather than amount or quantity. The variable marital status, for example, is a quali-
tative variable whose categories are “single,” “married,” “widowed,” and “divorced.”
Other examples of qualitative variables include sex (male or female), diagnosis, race,
occupation, and immunity status to some disease. In certain situations an investigator
may suspect that including one or more variables such as these in the regression equa-
tion would contribute significantly to the reduction of the error sum of squares and
thereby provide more precise estimates of the parameters of interest.

Suppose, for example, that we are studying the relationship between the dependent
variable systolic blood pressure and the independent variables weight and age. We might
also want to include the qualitative variable sex as one of the independent variables. Or
suppose we wish to gain insight into the nature of the relationship between lung capac-
ity and other relevant variables. Candidates for inclusion in the model might consist
of such quantitative variables as height, weight, and age, as well as qualitative vari-
ables such as sex, area of residence (urban, suburban, rural), and smoking status (cur-
rent smoker, ex-smoker, never smoked).

Dummy Variables In order to incorporate a qualitative independent variable in
the multiple regression model, it must be quantified in some manner. This may be
accomplished through the use of what are known as dummy variables.

DEFINITION

A dummy variable is a variable that assumes only a finite number of
values (such as 0 or 1) for the purpose of identifying the different cate-
gories of a qualitative variable.

The term “dummy” is used to indicate the fact that the numerical values (such as
0 and 1) assumed by the variable have no quantitative meaning but are used merely to
identify different categories of the qualitative variable under consideration. Qualitative
variables are sometimes called indicator variables, and when there are only two cate-
gories, they are sometimes called dichotomous variables.

The following are some examples of qualitative variables and the dummy variables
used to quantify them:

Qualitative Variable

Sex (male, female):

Place of residence (urban, rural, suburban):

Smoking status [current smoker, ex-smoker
(has not smoked for 5 years or less), ex-smoker
(has not smoked for more than 5 years), never
smoked]:




Note in these examples that when the qualitative variable has k categories, k - 1
dummy variables must be defined for all the categories to be properly coded. This rule is
applicable for any multiple regression containing an intercept constant. The variable sex, with
two categories, can be quantified by the use of only one dummy variable, while three dummy
variables are required to quantify the variable smoking status, which has four categories.

The following examples illustrate some of the uses of qualitative variables in mul-
tiple regression. In the first example we assume that there is no interaction between the
independent variables. Since the assumption of no interaction is not realistic in many
instances, we illustrate, in the second example, the analysis that is appropriate when inter-
action between variables is accounted for.

EXAMPLE 11.2.1

In a study of factors thought to be associated with birth weight, a simple random sample
of 100 birth records was selected from the North Carolina 2001 Birth Registry (A-1).
Table 11.2.1 shows, for three variables, the data extracted from each record. There are
two independent variables: length of gestation (weeks), which is quantitative, and smok-
ing status of mother (smoke), a qualitative variable. The dependent variable is birth
weight (grams).

TABLE 11.2.1 Data from a Simple Random Sample of 100 Births from the North
Carolina Birth Registry, Example 11.2.1


Solution:

For the analysis, we quantify smoking status by means of a dummy vari-
able that is coded 1 if the mother is a smoker and 0 if she is a nonsmoker.
The data in Table 11.2.1 are plotted as a scatter diagram in Figure 11.2.1.
The scatter diagram suggests that, in general, longer periods of gestation
are associated with larger birth weights.

To obtain additional insight into the nature of these data, we may enter
them into a computer and employ an appropriate program to perform fur-
ther analyses. For example, we enter the observations y1 = 3147, x 11 =
40, x 21 = 0, for the first case; y2 = 2977, x 12 = 41, x 22 = 0 for the second
case; and so on. Figure 11.2.2 shows the computer output obtained with the
use of the MINITAB multiple regression program.


We see in the printout that the multiple regression equation is

yN j = bN 0 + bN 1x 1j + bN 2 x 2j
yN j = -1724 + 130x 1j - 294bN 2x 2j

(11.2.1)

To observe the effect on this equation when we wish to consider only
the births to smoking mothers, we let x 2j = 1. The equation then becomes

yN j = -1724 + 130x1j - 294112
= -2018 + 130x1j

(11.2.2)

which has a y -intercept of -2018 and a slope of 130. Note that the
y-intercept for the new equation is equal to 1bN 0 + bN 12 = 3-1724 +
1-29424 = -2018.

Now let us consider only births to nonsmoking mothers. When we let
x 2 = 0, our regression equation reduces to

yNj = -1724 + 130x1j - 294102
= -1724 + 130x1j

(11.2.3)

The slope of this equation is the same as the slope of the equation for
smoking mothers, but the y-intercepts are different. The y-intercept for the
equation associated with nonsmoking mothers is larger than the one for the
smoking mothers. These results show that for this sample, babies born to
mothers who do not smoke weighed, on the average, more than babies born
to mothers who do smoke, when length of gestation is taken into account.
The amount of the difference, on the average, is 294 grams. Stated another
way, we can say that for this sample, babies born to mothers who smoke
weighed, on the average, 294 grams less than the babies born to mothers
who do not smoke, when length of gestation is taken into account. Figure
11.2.3 shows the scatter diagram of the original data along with a plot of
the two regression lines (Equations 11.2.2 and 11.2.3).
■
EXAMPLE 11.2.2

At this point a question arises regarding what inferences we can make about the sam-
pled population on the basis of the sample results obtained in Example 11.2.1. First of
all, we wish to know if the sample difference of 294 grams is significant. In other words,
does smoking have an effect on birth weight? We may answer this question through the
following hypothesis testing procedure.

Solution:

1. Data. The data are as given in Example 11.2.1.
2. Assumptions. We presume that the assumptions underlying multiple regression analysis are met.
3. Hypotheses. H0 : b 2 = 0; HA : b 2 Z 0. Suppose we let a = .05.
4. Test statistic. The test statistic is t = 1bN 2 - 02>sbN .2
5. Distribution of test statistic. When the assumptions are met and H0 is true the test statistic is distributed as Student’s t with 97 degrees of
freedom.
6. Decision rule. We reject H0 if the computed t is either greater than or equal to 1.9848 or less than or equal to -1.9848 (obtained by inter-
polation).
7. Calculation of test statistic. The calculated value of the test statistic
appears in Figure 11.2.2 as the t ratio for the coefficient associated with
the variable appearing in Column 3 of Table 11.2.1. This coefficient, of
course, is bN 2. We see that the computed t is -2.17.
8. Statistical decision. Since -2.17 6 -1.9848, we reject H0.
9. Conclusion. We conclude that, in the sampled population, whether the mothers smoke is associated with a reduction in the birth weights of their
babies.
■
10. p value. For this test we have p = .033 from Figure 11.2.2.

A Confidence Interval for B 2 Given that we are able to conclude that in
the sampled population the smoking status of the mothers does have an effect on the
birth weights of their babies, we may now inquire as to the magnitude of the effect. Our
best point estimate of the average difference in birth weights, when length of gestation
is taken into account, is 294 grams in favor of babies born to mothers who do not smoke.
We may obtain an interval estimate of the mean amount of the difference by using infor-
mation from the computer printout by means of the following expression:

bN 2 ; tsbN 2

For a 95 percent confidence interval, we have

-294.4 ; 1.98481135.82
-563.9, -24.9

Thus, we are 95 percent confident that the difference is somewhere between about 564
grams and 25 grams.

Advantages of Dummy Variables The reader may have correctly surmised
that an alternative analysis of the data of Example 11.2.1 would consist of fitting two
separate regression equations: one to the subsample of mothers who smoke and another
to the subsample of those who do not. Such an approach, however, lacks some of the
advantages of the dummy variable technique and is a less desirable procedure when the
latter procedure is valid. If we can justify the assumption that the two separate regres-
sion lines have the same slope, we can get a better estimate of this common slope through
the use of dummy variables, which entails pooling the data from the two subsamples. In
Example 11.2.1 the estimate using a dummy variable is based on a total sample size of
100 observations, whereas separate estimates would be based on a sample of 85 smok-
ers and only 15 nonsmokers. The dummy variables approach also yields more precise
inferences regarding other parameters since more degrees of freedom are available for
the calculation of the error mean square.

Use of Dummy Variables: Interaction Present Now let us consider
the situation in which interaction between the variables is assumed to be present. Sup-
pose, for example, that we have two independent variables: one quantitative variable X1
and one qualitative variable with three response levels yielding the two dummy variables
X2 and X3. The model, then, would be

yj = b 0 + b 1X1j + b 2X2j + b 3X3j + b 4X1j X2j + b 5X1j X3j + Pj
(11.2.4)

in which b 4X1j X2j and b 5X1j X3j are called interaction terms and represent the interaction
between the quantitative and the qualitative independent variables. Note that there is no
need to include in the model the term containing X2j X3j ; it will always be zero because
when X2 = 1, X3 = 0, and when X3 = 1, X2 = 0. The model of Equation 11.2.4 allows
for a different slope and Y-intercept for each level of the qualitative variable.

Suppose we use dummy variable coding to quantify the qualitative variable as follows:

1 for level 1
0 otherwise
1 for level 2
X3 = e
0 otherwise
X2 = e547

The three sample regression equations for the three levels of the qualitative variable, then,
are as follows:

Level 1 (X2 " 1, X3 " 0)
yNj = bN 0 + bN 1x1j + bN 2112 + bN 3102 + bN 4x1j 112 + bN 5x1j 102
= bN 0 + bN 1x1j + bN 2 + bN 4 x1j
= 1bN 0 + bN 22 + 1bN 1 + bN 42x1j
(11.2.5)

Level 2 (X2 " 0, X3 " 1)
yNj = bN 0 + bN 1x1j + bN 2102 + bN 3112 + bN 4x1j 102 + bN 5x1j 112
= bN 0 + bN 1x 1j + bN 3 + bN 5 x 1j
= 1bN 0 + bN 32 + 1bN 1 + bN 52x1j
(11.2.6)

Level 3 (X2 " 0, X3 " 0)
yNj = bN 0 + bN 1x1j + bN 2102 + bN 3102 + bN 4 x1j 102 + bN 5 x1j 102
= bN 0 + bN 1x1j
(11.2.7)

Let us illustrate these results by means of an example.

EXAMPLE 11.2.3

A team of mental health researchers wishes to compare three methods (A, B, and C) of
treating severe depression. They would also like to study the relationship between age
and treatment effectiveness as well as the interaction (if any) between age and treatment.
Each member of a simple random sample of 36 patients, comparable with respect to
diagnosis and severity of depression, was randomly assigned to receive treatment A, B,
or C. The results are shown in Table 11.2.2. The dependent variable Y is treatment effec-
tiveness, the quantitative independent variable X1 is patient’s age at nearest birthday, and
the independent variable type of treatment is a qualitative variable that occurs at three
levels. The following dummy variable coding is used to quantify the qualitative variable:

1 for treatment A
0 otherwise
1 for treatment B
X3 = e
0 otherwise
X2 = e

The scatter diagram for these data is shown in Figure 11.2.4. Table 11.2.3 shows the
data as they were entered into a computer for analysis. Figure 11.2.5 contains the printout
of the analysis using the MINITAB multiple regression program.

Solution:
Now let us examine the printout to see what it provides in the way of insight
into the nature of the relationships among the variables. The least-squares
equation is

yNj = 6.21 + 1.03x1j + 41.3x 2j + 22.7x 3j - .703x1j x 2j - .510x1j x 3j548


The three regression equations for the three treatments are as follows:

Treatment A (Equation 11.2.5)

yNj = 16.21 + 41.32 + 11.03 - .7032x 1j
= 47.51 + .327x 1j1


Treatment B (Equation 11.2.6)

yN j = 16.21 + 22.72 + 11.03 - .5102x1j
= 28.91 + .520x1j

Treatment C (Equation 11.2.7)

yN j = 6.21 + 1.03x1j

Figure 11.2.6 contains the scatter diagram of the original data along
with the regression equations for the three treatments. Visual inspection of
Figure 11.2.6 suggests that treatments A and B do not differ greatly with
respect to their slopes, but their y-intercepts are considerably different. The
graph suggests that treatment A is better than treatment B for younger
patients, but the difference is less dramatic with older patients. Treatment C
appears to be decidedly less desirable than both treatments A and B for
younger patients but is about as effective as treatment B for older patients.
These subjective impressions are compatible with the contention that there
is interaction between treatments and age.

Inference Procedures

The relationships we see in Figure 11.2.6, however, are sample results. What can we
conclude about the population from which the sample was drawn?

For an answer let us look at the t ratios on the computer printout in Figure 11.2.5.

Each of these is the test statistic

bN i - 0
t =
sbN i550


for testing H0 : b i = 0. We see by Equation 11.2.5 that the y-intercept of the regression
line for treatment A is equal to bN 0 + bN 2. Since the t ratio of 8.12 for testing H0 : b 2 = 0
is greater than the critical t of 2.0423 (for a = .05), we can reject H0 that b 2 = 0 and
conclude that the y-intercept of the population regression line for treatment A is differ-
ent from the y-intercept of the population regression line for treatment C, which has a
y-intercept of b 0. Similarly, since the t ratio of 4.46 for testing H0 : b 3 = 0 is also greater
than the critical t of 2.0423, we can conclude (at the .05 level of significance) that the
y-intercept of the population regression line for treatment B is also different from the y-
intercept of the population regression line for treatment C. (See the y-intercept of Equa-
tion 11.2.6.)

Now let us consider the slopes. We see by Equation 11.2.5 that the slope of the
regression line for treatment A is equal to bN 1 (the slope of the line for treatment C) + bN 4.
Since the t ratio of -6.45 for testing H0 : b 4 = 0 is less than the critical t of -2.0423,
we can conclude (for a = .05) that the slopes of the population regression lines for treat-
ments A and C are different. Similarly, since the computed t ratio for testing H0 : b 5 = 0
is also less than -2.0423, we conclude (for a = .05) that the population regression lines
for treatments B and C have different slopes (see the slope of Equation 11.2.6). Thus we
conclude that there is interaction between age and type of treatment. This is reflected by
a lack of parallelism among the regression lines in Figure 11.2.6.
■
Another question of interest is this: Is the slope of the population regression line
for treatment A different from the slope of the population regression line for treatment
B? To answer this question requires computational techniques beyond the scope of
this text. The interested reader is referred to books devoted specifically to regression
analysis.

In Section 10.4 the reader was warned that there are problems involved in making
multiple inferences from the same sample data. Again, books on regression analysis are
available that may be consulted for procedures to be followed when multiple inferences,
such as those discussed in this section, are desired.

We have discussed only two situations in which the use of dummy variables is
appropriate. More complex models involving the use of one or more qualitative inde-
pendent variables in the presence of two or more quantitative variables may be appro-
priate in certain circumstances. More complex models are discussed in the many books
devoted to the subject of multiple regression analysis.

EXERCISES

For each exercise do the following:

(a) Draw a scatter diagram of the data using different symbols for the different categorical variables.
(b) Use dummy variable coding and regression to analyze the data.
(c) Perform appropriate hypothesis tests and construct appropriate confidence intervals using your choice of significance and confidence levels.
(d) Find the p value for each test that you perform.

11.2.1 For subjects undergoing stem cell transplants, dendritic cells (DCs) are antigen-presenting cells that
are critical to the generation of immunologic tumor responses. Bolwell et al. (A-2) studied lymphoid
DCs in 44 subjects who underwent autologous stem cell transplantation. The outcome variable is the
concentration of DC2 cells as measured by flow cytometry. One of the independent variables is the
age of the subject (years), and the second independent variable is the mobilization method. During
chemotherapy, 11 subjects received granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) mobilizer
(mg/kg/day) and 33 received etoposide (2 g>m2). The mobilizer is a kind of blood progenitor cell
that triggers the formation of the DC cells. The results were as follows:


11.2.2 According to Pandey et al. (A-3) carcinoma of the gallbladder is not infrequent. One of the pri-
mary risk factors for gallbladder cancer is cholelithiasis, the asymptomatic presence of stones in
the gallbladder. The researchers performed a case-control study of 50 subjects with gallbladder
cancer and 50 subjects with cholelithiasis. Of interest was the concentration of lipid peroxidation
products in gallbladder bile, a condition that may give rise to gallbladder cancer. The lipid perox-
idation product melonaldehyde (MDA, mg/mg) was used to measure lipid peroxidation. One of the
independent variables considered was the cytochrome P-450 concentration (CYTO, nmol/mg).
Researchers used disease status (gallbladder cancer vs. cholelithiasis) and cytochrome P-450 con-
centration to predict MDA. The following data were collected.


11.2.3 The purpose of a study by Krantz et al. (A-4) was to investigate dose-related effects of methadone
in subjects with torsades de pointes, a polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. In the study of 17
subjects, 10 were men (sex = 0) and seven were women (sex = 1). The outcome variable, is the
QTc interval, a measure of arrhythmia risk. The other independent variable, in addition to sex,
was methadone dose (mg/day). Measurements on these variables for the 17 subjects were as
follows.

11.2.4 Refer to Exercise 9.7.2, which describes research by Reiss et al. (A-5), who collected samples from
90 patients and measured partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) using two different methods: the
CoaguChek point-of-care assay and standard laboratory hospital assay. The subjects were also classi-
fied by their medication status: 30 receiving heparin alone, 30 receiving heparin with warfarin, and
30 receiving warfarin and enoxaparin. The data are as follows.

Use the multiple regression to predict the hospital aPTT from the CoaguCheck aPTT level as well
as the medication received. Is knowledge of medication useful in the prediction? Let a = .05 for
all tests.556CHAPTER 11 REGRESSION ANALYSIS: SOME ADDITIONAL TECHNIQUES

11.3 VARIABLE SELECTION PROCEDURES

Health sciences researchers contemplating the use of multiple regression analysis to solve
problems usually find that they have a large number of variables from which to select
the independent variables to be employed as predictors of the dependent variable. Such
investigators will want to include in their model as many variables as possible in order
to maximize the model’s predictive ability. The investigator must realize, however, that
adding another independent variable to a set of independent variables always increases
the coefficient of determination R 2. Therefore, independent variables should not be added
to the model indiscriminately, but only for good reason. In most situations, for example,
some potential predictor variables are more expensive than others in terms of data-
collection costs. The cost-conscious investigator, therefore, will not want to include an
expensive variable in a model unless there is evidence that it makes a worthwhile
contribution to the predictive ability of the model.

The investigator who wishes to use multiple regression analysis most effectively
must be able to employ some strategy for making intelligent selections from among
those potential predictor variables that are available. Many such strategies are in cur-
rent use, and each has its proponents. The strategies vary in terms of complexity and
the tedium involved in their employment. Unfortunately, the strategies do not always
lead to the same solution when applied to the same problem.

Stepwise Regression Perhaps the most widely used strategy for selecting inde-
pendent variables for a multiple regression model is the stepwise procedure. The proce-
dure consists of a series of steps. At each step of the procedure each variable then in the
model is evaluated to see if, according to specified criteria, it should remain in the model.

Suppose, for example, that we wish to perform stepwise regression for a model
containing k predictor variables. The criterion measure is computed for each variable. Of
all the variables that do not satisfy the criterion for inclusion in the model, the one that
least satisfies the criterion is removed from the model. If a variable is removed in this
step, the regression equation for the smaller model is calculated and the criterion meas-
ure is computed for each variable now in the model. If any of these variables fail to sat-
isfy the criterion for inclusion in the model, the one that least satisfies the criterion is
removed. If a variable is removed at this step, the variable that was removed in the first
step is reentered into the model, and the evaluation procedure is continued. This process
continues until no more variables can be entered or removed.

The nature of the stepwise procedure is such that, although a variable may be
deleted from the model in one step, it is evaluated for possible reentry into the model in
subsequent steps.

MINITAB’s STEPWISE procedure, for example, uses the associated F statistic as
the evaluative criterion for deciding whether a variable should be deleted or added to
the model. Unless otherwise specified, the cutoff value is F = 4. The printout of the
STEPWISE results contains t statistics (the square root of F ) rather than F statistics.
At each step MINITAB calculates an F statistic for each variable then in the model. If
the F statistic for any of these variables is less than the specified cutoff value (4 if some
other value is not specified), the variable with the smallest F is removed from the model.
The regression equation is refitted for the reduced model, the results are printed, and
the procedure goes to the next step. If no variable can be removed, the procedure tries
to add a variable. An F statistic is calculated for each variable not then in the model.
Of these variables, the one with the largest associated F statistic is added, provided its
F statistic is larger than the specified cutoff value (4 if some other value is not speci-
fied). The regression equation is refitted for the new model, the results are printed, and
the procedure goes on to the next step. The procedure stops when no variable can be
added or deleted.

The following example illustrates the use of the stepwise procedure for selecting
variables for a multiple regression model.

EXAMPLE 11.3.1

A nursing director would like to use nurses’ personal characteristics to develop a regres-
sion model for predicting the job performance ( JOBPER). The following variables are
available from which to choose the independent variables to include in the model:

X1 = assertiveness 1ASRV2
X2 = enthusiasm 1ENTH2
X3 = ambition 1AMB2
X4 = communication skills 1COMM2
X5 = problem-solving skills 1PROB2
X6 = initiative 1INIT2

We wish to use the stepwise procedure for selecting independent variables from those
available in the table to construct a multiple regression model for predicting job
performance.

Solution:

Table 11.3.1 shows the measurements taken on the dependent variable,
JOBPER, and each of the six independent variables for a sample of
30 nurses.

TABLE 11.3.1 Measurements on Seven Variables for Examples 11.3.1


We use MINITAB to obtain a useful model by the stepwise proce-
dure. Observations on the dependent variable job performance (JOBPER)
and the six candidate independent variables are stored in MINITAB
Columns 1 through 7, respectively. Figure 11.3.1 shows the appropriate
MINITAB procedure and the printout of the results.

To obtain the results in Figure 11.3.1, the values of F to enter and F
to remove both were set automatically at 4. In step 1 there are no variables
to be considered for deletion from the model. The variable AMB (Column
4) has the largest associated F statistic, which is F = 19.7422 = 94.8676.
Since 94.8676 is greater than 4, AMB is added to the model. In step 2 the
variable INIT (Column 7) qualifies for addition to the model since its
associated F of 1-2.222 = 4.84 is greater than 4 and it is the variable with
the largest associated F statistic. It is added to the model. After step 2
no other variable could be added or deleted, and the procedure stopped.
We see, then, that the model chosen by the stepwise procedure is a two-
independent-variable model with AMB and INIT as the independent vari-
ables. The estimated regression equation is

yN = 31.96 + .787x 3 - .45x 6


To change the criterion for allowing a variable to enter the model from 4 to some
other value K, click on Options, then type the desired value of K in the Enter box. The
new criterion F statistic, then, is K rather than 4. To change the criterion for deleting a
variable from the model from 4 to some other value K, click on Options, then type the
desired value of K in the Remove box. We must choose K to enter to be greater than or
equal to K to remove.

Though the stepwise selection procedure is a common technique employed by
researchers, other methods are available. Following is a brief discussion of two such
tools. The final model obtained by each of these procedures is the same model that was
found by using the stepwise procedure in Example 11.3.1.

Forward Selection This strategy is closely related to the stepwise regression
procedure. This method builds a model using correlations. Variables are retained that
meet the criteria for inclusion, as in stepwise selection. The first variable entered into
the model is the one with the highest correlation with the dependent variable. If this vari-
able meets the inclusion criterion, it is retained. The next variable to be considered for
inclusion is the one with the highest partial correlation with the dependent variable. If it
meets the inclusion criteria, it is retained. This procedure continues until all of the inde-
pendent variables have been considered. The final model contains all of the independent
variables that meet the inclusion criteria.

Backward Elimination This model-building procedure begins with all of the
variables in the model. This strategy also builds a model using correlations and a prede-
termined inclusion criterion based on the F statistic. The first variable considered for
removal from the model is the one with the smallest partial correlation coefficient. If this
variable does not meet the criterion for inclusion, it is eliminated from the model. The
next variable to be considered for elimination is the one with the next lowest partial cor-
relation. It will be eliminated if it fails to meet the criterion for inclusion. This proce-
dure continues until all variables have been considered for elimination. The final model
contains all of the independent variables that meet the inclusion criteria.

EXERCISES

11.3.1 Refer to the data of Exercise 10.3.2 reported by Son et al. (A-6), who studied family caregiving
in Korea of older adults with dementia. The outcome variable, caregiver burden (BURDEN), was
measured by the Korean Burden Inventory (KBI) where scores ranged from 28 to 140 with higher
scores indicating higher burden. Perform a stepwise regression analysis on the following independ-
ent variables reported by the researchers:

CGAGE: caregiver age (years)
CGINCOME: caregiver income (Won-Korean currency)
CGDUR: caregiver-duration of caregiving (month)
ADL: total activities of daily living where low scores indicate the elderly perform activities
independently.
MEM: memory and behavioral problems with higher scores indicating more problems.
COG: cognitive impairment with lower scores indicating a greater degree of cognitive impair-
ment.
SOCIALSU: total score of perceived social support (25–175, higher values indicating more
support). The reported data are as follows.

11.3.2 Machiel Naeije (A-7) identifies variables useful in predicting maximum mouth opening (MMO,
millimeters) for 35 healthy volunteers. The variables examined were:

AGE:
DOWN_CON:
FORW_CON:
Gender:
MAN_LENG:
MAN_WIDT:
years
downward condylar translation, mm
forward condylar translation, mm
0 " Female, 1 " Male
mandibular length, mm
mandibular width, mm

Use the following reported measurements to perform a stepwise regression.


11.3.3 One purpose of a study by Connor et al. (A-8) was to examine reactive aggression among chil-
dren and adolescents referred to a residential treatment center. The researchers used the Proactive/
Reactive Rating Scale, obtained by presenting three statements to clinicians who examined the
subjects. The respondents answered, using a scale from 1 to 5, with 5 indicating that the state-
ment almost always applied to the child. An example of a reactive aggression statement is,
“When this child has been teased or threatened, he or she gets angry easily and strikes back.”
The reactive score was the average response to three statements of this type. With this variable
as the outcome variable, researchers also examined the following: AGE (years), VERBALIQ
(verbal IQ), STIM (stimulant use), AGEABUSE (age when first abused), CTQ (a measure of
hyperactivity in which higher scores indicate higher hyperactivity), TOTALHOS (total hostility
as measured by an evaluator, with higher numbers indicating higher hostility). Perform stepwise
regression to find the variables most useful in predicting reactive aggression in the following
sample of 68 subjects.

11.4 LOGISTIC REGRESSION

Up to now our discussion of regression analysis has been limited to those situations
in which the dependent variable is a continuous variable such as weight, blood pres-
sure, or plasma levels of some hormone. Much research in the health sciences field
is motivated by a desire to describe, understand, and make use of the relationship
between independent variables and a dependent (or outcome) variable that is discrete.
Particularly plentiful are circumstances in which the outcome variable is dichotomous.
A dichotomous variable, we recall, is a variable that can assume only one of two
mutually exclusive values. These values are usually coded Y = 1 for a success and
Y = 0 for a nonsuccess, or failure. Dichotomous variables include those whose two
possible values are such categories as died–did not die; cured–not cured; disease
occurred–disease did not occur; and smoker–nonsmoker. The health sciences profes-
sional who either engages in research or needs to understand the results of research
conducted by others will find it advantageous to have, at least, a basic understanding
of logistic regression, the type of regression analysis that is usually employed when
the dependent variable is dichotomous. The purpose of the present discussion is to
provide the reader with this level of understanding. We shall limit our presentation to
the case in which there is only one independent variable that may be either continu-
ous or dichotomous.

The Logistic Regression Model Recall that in Chapter 9 we referred to
regression analysis involving only two variables as simple linear regression analysis. The
simple linear regression model was expressed by the equation

y = b 0 + b 1x + P

(11.4.1)

in which y is an arbitrary observed value of the continuous dependent variable. When
the observed value of Y is my ƒ x , the mean of a subpopulation of Y values for a given value
of X, the quantity P, the difference between the observed Y and the regression line (see
Figure 9.2.1) is zero, and we may write Equation 11.4.1 as

my ƒ x = b 0 + b 1x(11.4.2)
E 1y ƒ x2 = b 0 + b 1x(11.4.3)

which may also be written as

Generally the right-hand side of Equations 11.4.1 through 11.4.3 may assume any value
between minus infinity and plus infinity.

Even though only two variables are involved, the simple linear regression model
is not appropriate when Y is a dichotomous variable because the expected value (or mean)
of Y is the probability that Y = 1 and, therefore, is limited to the range 0 through 1,
inclusive. Equations 11.4.1 through 11.4.3, then, are incompatible with the reality of the
situation.

If we let p = P1Y = 12, then the ratio p>11 - p2 can take on values between 0 and
plus infinity. Furthermore, the natural logarithm (ln) of p>11 - p2 can take on values
between minus infinity and plus infinity just as can the right-hand side of Equations
11.4.1 through 11.4.3. Therefore, we may write

ln c
p
d = b 0 + b 1x
1 - p
(11.4.4)

Equation 11.4.4 is called the logistic regression model because the transformation of my ƒ x
(that is, p) to ln3p>11 - p24 is called the logit transformation. Equation 11.4.4 may also
be written as

p =
exp1b 0 + b 1x2
1 + exp1b 0 + b 1x2
(11.4.5)

in which exp is the inverse of the natural logarithm.

The logistic regression model is widely used in health sciences research. For exam-
ple, the model is frequently used by epidemiologists as a model for the probability (inter-
preted as the risk) that an individual will acquire a disease during some specified time
period during which he or she is exposed to a condition (called a risk factor) known to be
or suspected of being associated with the disease.

Logistic Regression: Dichotomous Independent Variable The
simplest situation in which logistic regression is applicable is one in which both the
dependent and the independent variables are dichotomous. The values of the dependent
(or outcome) variable usually indicate whether or not a subject acquired a disease or
whether or not the subject died. The values of the independent variable indicate the sta-
tus of the subject relative to the presence or absence of some risk factor. In the discus-
sion that follows we assume that the dichotomies of the two variables are coded 0 and
1. When this is the case the variables may be cross-classified in a table, such as Table
11.4.1, that contains two rows and two columns. The cells of the table contain the fre-
quencies of occurrence of all possible pairs of values of the two variables: (1, 1), (1, 0),
(0, 1), and (0, 0).

An objective of the analysis of data that meet these criteria is a statistic known as
the odds ratio. To understand the concept of the odds ratio, we must understand the term
odds, which is frequently used by those who place bets on the outcomes of sporting events
or participate in other types of gambling activities. Using probability terminology, we may
define odds as follows.

DEFINITION

The odds for success are the ratio of the probability of success to the
probability of failure.

The odds ratio is a measure of how much greater (or less) the odds are for sub-
jects possessing the risk factor to experience a particular outcome. This conclusion
assumes that the outcome is a rare event. For example, when the outcome is the con-
tracting of a disease, the interpretation of the odds ratio assumes that the disease is rare.

Suppose, for example, that the outcome variable is the acquisition or nonacquisition
of skin cancer and the independent variable (or risk factor) is high levels of exposure to
the sun. Analysis of such data collected on a sample of subjects might yield an odds ratio
of 2, indicating that the odds of skin cancer are two times higher among subjects with high
levels of exposure to the sun than among subjects without high levels of exposure.

Computer software packages that perform logistic regression frequently provide as
part of their output estimates of b 0 and b 1 and the numerical value of the odds ratio.
As it turns out the odds ratio is equal to exp1b 12.

EXAMPLE 11.4.1

LaMont et al. (A-9) tested for obstructive coronary artery disease (OCAD) among 113 men
and 35 women who complained of chest pain or possible equivalent to their primary care
physician. Table 11.4.2 shows the cross-classification of OCAD with gender. We wish
to use logistic regression analysis to determine how much greater the odds are of find-
ing OCAD among men than among women.

Solution:

We may use the SAS® software package to analyze these data. The inde-
pendent variable is gender and the dependent variable is status with respect
to having obstructive coronary artery disease (OCAD). Use of the SAS®
command PROC LOGIST yields, as part of the resulting output, the statis-
tics shown in Figure 11.4.1.

We see that the estimate of a is -1.4773 and the estimate of b 1 is 1.7649.
The estimated odds ratio, then, is OR = exp11.76492 = 5.84. Thus we esti-
mate that the odds of finding a case of obstructive coronary artery disease to
be almost six times higher among men than women.
■
Logistic Regression: Continuous Independent Variable Now let
us consider the situation in which we have a dichotomous dependent variable and a con-
tinuous independent variable. We shall assume that a computer is available to perform
the calculations. Our discussion, consequently, will focus on an evaluation of the ade-
quacy of the model as a representation of the data at hand, interpretation of key elements
of the computer printout, and the use of the results to answer relevant questions about
the relationship between the two variables.

EXAMPLE 11.4.2

According to Gallagher et al. (A-10), cardiac rehabilitation programs offer “informa-
tion, support, and monitoring for return to activities, symptom management, and risk
factor modification.” The researchers conducted a study to identify among women fac-
tors that are associated with participation in such programs. The data in Table 11.4.3
are the ages of 185 women discharged from a hospital in Australia who met eligibility
criteria involving discharge for myocardial infarction, artery bypass surgery, angio-
plasty, or stent. We wish to use these data to obtain information regarding the relation-
ship between age (years) and participation in a cardiac rehabilitation program
(ATT = 1, if participated, and ATT = 0, if not). We wish also to know if we may use
the results of our analysis to predict the likelihood of participation by a woman if we
know her age.

Solution:

The independent variable is the continuous variable age (AGE), and the
dependent or response variable is status with respect to attendance in a car-
diac rehabilitation program. The dependent variable is a dichotomous vari-
able that can assume one of two values: 0 = did not attend, and 1 = did
attend. We use the SAS® software package to analyze the data. The SAS®
command is PROC LOGISTIC, but if we wish to predict attendance in the
cardiac program, we need to use the “descending” option with PROC
LOGISTIC. (When you wish to predict the outcome labeled “1” of the
dependent variable, use the “descending option” in SAS®. Consult SAS®
documentation for further details.) A partial printout of the analysis is shown
in Figure 11.4.2.

The slope of our regression is -.0379, and the intercept is 1.8744. The
regression equation, then, is

yN i = 1.8744 - .0379x i

where yNi = ln3pN i>11 - pN i24 and pN i is the predicted probability of attending
cardiac rehabilitation for a woman aged x i.

Test of H0 that B 1 " 0

We reach a conclusion about the adequacy of the logistic model by testing the null
hypothesis that the slope of the regression line is zero. The test statistic is z = bN 1>sbN 1
where z is the standard normal statistic, bN 1 is the sample slope 1-.03792, and sbN 1 is its
standard error (.0146) as shown in Figure 11.4.2. From these numbers we compute
z = -.0379>.0146 = -2.5959, which has an associated two-sided p value of .0094. We
conclude, therefore, that the logistic model is adequate. The square of z is chi-square with
1 degree of freedom, a statistic that is shown in Figure 11.4.2.

Using the Logistic Regression to Estimate p

We may use Equation 11.4.5 and the results of our analysis to estimate p, the probabil-
ity that a woman of a given age (within the range of ages represented by the data) will
attend a cardiac rehabilitation program. Suppose, for example, that we wish to estimate
the probability that a woman who is 50 years of age will participate in a rehabilitation
program. Substituting 50 and the results shown in Figure 11.4.2 into Equation 11.4.5
gives

pN =
exp31.8744 - 1.0379215024
1 + exp31.8744 - 1.0379215024
= .49485

SAS® calculates the estimated probabilities for the given values of X. We can see the
estimated probabilities of attending cardiac rehabilitation programs for the age range
of the subjects enrolled in the study in Figure 11.4.3. Since the slope was negative,
we see a decreasing probability of attending a cardiac rehabilitation program for older
women.


Multiple Logistic Regression Practitioners often are interested in the rela-
tionships of several independent variables to a response variable. These independent vari-
ables may be either continuous or discrete or a combination of the two.

Multiple logistic models are constructed by expanding Equations 11.4.1 to 11.4.4.
If we begin with Equation 11.4.4, multiple logistic regression can be represented as

lnc
p
d = b 0 + b 1x1j + b 2x 2j + Á + b k x kj
1 - p
(11.4.6)

Using the logit transformation, we now have

p =
exp1b 0 + b 1x 1j + b 2x 2j + Á + b k x kj2
1 + exp1b 0 + b 1x 1j + b 2x 2j + Á + b k x kj2
(11.4.7)

EXAMPLE 11.4.3

Consider the data presented in Review Exercise 24. In this study by Fils-Aime et al.
(A-21), data were gathered and classified with regard to alcohol use. Subjects were classi-
fied as having either early (% 25 years) or late ($ 25 years) onset of excessive alcohol use.

Levels of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tryptophan (TRYPT) and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid
(5-HIAA) concentrations were also obtained.

Solution:

The independent variables are the concentrations of TRYPT and 5-HIAA,
and the dependent variable is the dichotomous response for onset of exces-
sive alcohol use. We use SPSS software to analyze the data. The output is
presented in Figure 11.4.3.

The equation can be written as

yN i = 2.076 - .013x 1j + 0x 2j

Note that the coefficient for TRYPT is 0, and therefore it is not playing a role in the
model.

Test of H0 that B 1 " 0

Tests for significance of the regression coefficients can be obtained directly from Figure
11.4.3. Note that both the constant (intercept) and the 5-HIAA variables are significant
in the model (both have p values, noted as “Sig.” in the table, % .05); however, TRYPT
is not significant and therefore need not be in the model, suggesting that it is not useful
for identifying those study participants with early or late alcoholism onset.

As above, probabilities can be easily obtained by using equation 11.4.7 and sub-
stituting the values obtained from the analysis.
■

Polytomous Logistic Regression Thus far we have limited our discussion
to situations in which there is a dichotomous response variable (e.g., successful or unsuc-
cessful). Often we have a situation in which multiple categories make up the response.
We may, for example, have subjects that are classified as positive, negative, and unde-
termined for a given disease (a standard polytomous response). There may also be times
when we have a response variable that is ordered. We may, for example, classify our
subjects by BMI as underweight, ideal weight, overweight, or obese (an ordinal polyto-
mous response). The modeling process is slightly more complex and requires the use of
a computer program. For those interested in exploring these valuable methods further,
we recommend the book by Hosmer and Lemeshow (1).

Further Reading We have discussed only the basic concepts and applications
of logistic regression. The technique has much wider application. Stepwise regression
analysis may be used with logistic regression. There are also techniques available for
constructing confidence intervals for odds ratios. The reader who wishes to learn more
about logistic regression may consult the books by Hosmer and Lemeshow (1) and
Kleinbaum (2).

EXERCISES

11.4.1 In a study of violent victimization of women and men, Porcerelli et al. (A-11) collected informa-
tion from 679 women and 345 men ages 18 to 64 years at several family-practice centers in the
metropolitan Detroit area. Patients filled out a health history questionnaire that included a ques-
tion about victimization. The following table shows the sample subjects cross-classified by gender
and whether the subject self-identified as being “hit, kicked, punched, or otherwise hurt by some-
one within the past year.” Subjects answering yes to that question are classified “violently victim-
ized.” Use logistic regression analysis to find the regression coefficients and the estimate of the
odds ratio. Write an interpretation of your results.


11.4.2 Refer to the research of Gallagher et al. (A-10) discussed in Example 11.4.2. Another covariate
of interest was a score using the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Index. A higher value for this
score indicates a higher level of anxiety and depression. Use the following data to predict whether
a woman in the study participated in a cardiac rehabilitation program.



11.5 SUMMARY

This chapter is included for the benefit of those who wish to extend their understand-
ing of regression analysis and their ability to apply techniques to models that are more
complex than those covered in Chapters 9 and 10. In this chapter we present some
additional topics from regression analysis. We discuss the analysis that is appropri-
ate when one or more of the independent variables is dichotomous. In this discussion
the concept of dummy variable coding is presented. A second topic that we discuss
is how to select the most useful independent variables when we have a long list of
potential candidates. The technique we illustrate for the purpose is stepwise regres-
sion analysis. Finally, we present the basic concepts and procedures that are involved
in logistic regression analysis. We cover two situations: the case in which the inde-
pendent variable is dichotomous, and the case in which the independent variable is
continuous.

 Since the calculations involved in obtaining useful results from data that are appro-
priate for analysis by means of the techniques presented in this chapter are complicated
and time-consuming when attempted by hand, it is recommended that a computer be
used to work the exercises.

REVIEW QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES

1.What is a qualitative variable?
2.What is a dummy variable?
3.Explain and illustrate the technique of dummy variable coding.
4.Why is a knowledge of variable selection techniques important to the health sciences researcher?
5.What is stepwise regression?
6.Explain the basic concept involved in stepwise regression.
7.When is logistic regression used?
8.Write out and explain the components of the logistic regression model.
9.Define the word odds.
10.What is an odds ratio?
11.Give an example in your field in which logistic regression analysis would be appropriate when the
independent variable is dichotomous.
12.Give an example in your field in which logistic regression analysis would be appropriate when the
independent variable is continuous.
13.Find a published article in the health sciences field in which each of the following techniques is
employed:

(a) Dummy variable coding
(b) Stepwise regression
(c) Logistic regression

Write a report on the article in which you identify the variables involved, the reason for the choice
of the technique, and the conclusions that the authors reach on the basis of their analysis.

14. In Example 10.3.1, we saw that the purpose of a study by Jansen and Keller (A-12) was to pre-
dict the capacity to direct attention (CDA) in elderly subjects. The study collected information on
71 community-dwelling older women with normal mental status. Higher CDA scores indicate bet-
ter attentional functioning. In addition to the variables age and education level, the researchers per-
formed stepwise regression with two additional variables: IADL, a measure of activities of daily
living (higher values indicate greater number of daily activities), and ADS, a measure of atten-
tional demands (higher values indicate more attentional demands). Perform stepwise regression
with the data in the following table and report your final model, p values, and conclusions.


15. In the following table are the cardiac output (L/min) and oxygen consumption (VO2) values for a
sample of adults (A) and children (C), who participated in a study designed to investigate the rela-
tionship among these variables. Measurements were taken both at rest and during exercise. Treat
cardiac output as the dependent variable and use dummy variable coding and analyze the data by
regression techniques. Explain the results. Plot the original data and the fitted regression equations.

16. A simple random sample of normal subjects between the ages of 6 and 18 yielded the data on
total body potassium (mEq) and total body water (liters) shown in the following table. Let total
potassium be the dependent variable and use dummy variable coding to quantify the qualitative
variable. Analyze the data using regression techniques. Explain the results. Plot the original data
and the fitted regression equations.


17. The data shown in the following table were collected as part of a study in which the subjects were
preterm infants with low birth weights born in three different hospitals. Use dummy variable cod-
ing and multiple regression techniques to analyze these data. May we conclude that the three sam-
ple hospital populations differ with respect to mean birth weight when gestational age is taken into
account? May we conclude that there is interaction between hospital of birth and gestational age?
Plot the original data and the fitted regression equations.


18. Refer to Chapter 9, Review Exercise 18. In the study cited in that exercise, Maria Mathias (A-13)
investigated the relationship between ages (AGE) of boys and improvement in measures of hyper-
activity, attitude, and social behavior. In the study, subjects were randomly assigned to two differ-
ent treatments. The control group (TREAT = 0) received standard therapy for hyperactivity, and
the treatment group (TREAT = 1) received standard therapy plus pet therapy. The results are
shown in the following table. Create a scatter plot with age as the independent variable and ATT
(change in attitude with positive numbers indicating positive change in attitude) as the dependent
variable. Use different symbols for the two different treatment groups. Use multiple regression
techniques to determine whether age, treatment, or the interaction are useful in predicting ATT.
Report your results.

For each study described in Exercises 19 through 21, answer as many of the following questions
as possible:

(a) Which is the dependent variable?
(b) What are the independent variables?
(c) What are the appropriate null and alternative hypotheses?
(d) Which null hypotheses do you think were rejected? Why?
(e) Which is the more relevant objective, prediction or estimation, or are the two equally relevant?

Explain your answer.

(f) What is the sampled population?
(g) What is the target population?
(h) Which variables are related to which other variables? Are the relationships direct or inverse?
(i) Write out the regression equation using appropriate numbers for parameter estimates.
( j) Give numerical values for any other statistics that you can.
(k) Identify each variable as to whether it is quantitative or qualitative.
(l) Explain the meaning of any statistics for which numerical values are given.

19. Golfinopoulos and Arhonditsis (A-14) used a multiple regression model in a study of tri-
halomethanes (THMs) in drinking water in Athens, Greece. THMs are of concern since they have
been related to cancer and reproductive outcomes. The researchers found the following regression
model useful in predicting THM:

THM = -.26chla + 1.57 pH + 28.74Br - 66.72Br 2
-43.63S + 1.13Sp + 2.62T * S - .72T * CL

The variables were as follows: chla = chlorophyll concentration, pH = acid/base scale, Br =
bromide concentration, S = dummy variable for summer, Sp = dummy variable for spring, T =
temperature, and CL = chlorine concentration. The researchers reported R = .52, p 6 .001.

20. In a study by Takata et al. (A-15), investigators evaluated the relationship between chewing ability
and teeth number and measures of physical fitness in a sample of subjects ages 80 or higher in Japan.
One of the outcome variables that measured physical fitness was leg extensor strength. To measure
the ability to chew foods, subjects were asked about their ability to chew 15 foods (peanuts, vinegared
octopus, and French bread, among others). Consideration of such variables as height, body weight,
gender, systolic blood pressure, serum albumin, fasting glucose concentration, back pain, smoking,
alcohol consumption, marital status, regular medical treatment, and regular exercise revealed that the
number of chewable foods was significant in predicting leg extensor strength 1bN 1 = .075, p = .03662.
However, in the presence of the other variables, number of teeth was not a significant predictor
1bN 1 = .003, p = .93732.

21. Varela et al. (A-16) examined 515 patients who underwent lung resection for bronchogenic carci-
noma. The outcome variable was the occurrence of cardiorespiratory morbidity after surgery. Any
of the following postoperative events indicated morbidity: pulmonary atelectasis or pneumonia,
respiratory or ventilatory insufficiency at discharge, need for mechanical ventilation at any time
after extubation in the operating room, pulmonary thromboembolism, arrhythmia, myocardial
ischemia or infarct, and clinical cardiac insufficiency. Performing a stepwise logistic regression,
the researchers found that age 1p 6 .0012 and postoperative forced expiratory volume 1p = .0032
were statistically significant in predicting the occurrence of cardiorespiratory morbidity.

For each of the data sets given in Exercises 22 through 29, do as many of the following as you
think appropriate:

(a) Apply one or more of the techniques discussed in this chapter.
(b) Apply one or more of the techniques discussed in previous chapters.
(c) Construct graphs.
(d) Formulate relevant hypotheses, perform the appropriate tests, and find p values.
(e) State the statistical decisions and clinical conclusions that the results of your hypothesis tests justify.
(f) Describe the population(s) to which you think your inferences are applicable.

22. A study by Davies et al. (A-17) was motivated by the fact that, in previous studies of contractile
responses to b -adrenoceptor agonists in single myocytes from failing and nonfailing human hearts,
they had observed an age-related decline in maximum response to isoproterenol, at frequencies
where the maximum response to high Ca2 + in the same cell was unchanged. For the present study,
the investigators computed the isoproterenol/Ca2 + ratio (ISO/CA) from measurements taken on
myocytes from patients ranging in age from 7 to 70 years. Subjects were classified as older ( 750
years) and younger. The following are the (ISO/CA) values, age, and myocyte source of subjects
in the study. Myocyte sources were reported as donor and biopsy.

23. Hayton et al. (A-18) investigated the pharmacokinetics and bioavailability of cefetamet and cefe-
tamet pivoxil in infants between the ages of 3.5 and 17.3 months who had received the antibiotic
during and after urological surgery. Among the pharmacokinetic data collected were the follow-
ing measurements of the steady-state apparent volume of distribution (V). Also shown are previ-
ously collected data on children ages 3 to 12 years (A-19) and adults (A-20). Weights (W) of
subjects are also shown.

24. According to Fils-Aime et al. (A-21), epidemiologic surveys have found that alcoholism is the most
common mental or substance abuse disorder among men in the United States. Fils-Aime and asso-
ciates investigated the interrelationships of age at onset of excessive alcohol consumption, family his-
tory of alcoholism, psychiatric comorbidity, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) monoamine metabolite
concentrations in abstinent, treatment-seeking alcoholics. Subjects were mostly white males classi-
fied as experiencing early (25 years or younger) or late (older than 25 years) onset of excessive alco-
hol consumption. Among the data collected were the following measurements on CSF tryptophan
(TRYPT) and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) concentrations (pmol/ml).


25. The objective of a study by Abrahamsson et al. (A-22) was to investigate the anti-thrombotic effects
of an inhibitor of the plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) in rats given endotoxin. Experi-
mental subjects were male Sprague–Dawley rats weighing between 300 and 400 grams. Among
the data collected were the following measurements on PAI-1 activity and the lung 125I-concen-
tration in anesthetized rats given three drugs:

26. Pearse and Sylvester (A-23) conducted a study to determine the separate contributions of
ischemia and extracorporeal perfusion to vascular injury occurring in isolated sheep lungs and
to determine the oxygen dependence of this injury. Lungs were subjected to ischemia alone,
extracorporeal perfusion alone, and both ischemia and extracorporeal perfusion. Among the data
collected were the following observations on change in pulmonary arterial pressure (mm Hg)
and pulmonary vascular permeability assessed by estimation of the reflection coefficient for
albumin in perfused lungs with and without preceding ischemia:

27. The purpose of a study by Balzamo et al. (A-24) was to investigate, in anesthetized rabbits, the
effects of mechanical ventilation on the concentration of substance P (SP) measured by radioim-
munoassay in nerves and muscles associated with ventilation and participating in the sensory inner-
vation of the respiratory apparatus and heart. SP is a neurotransmitter located in primary sensory
neurons in the central and autonomic nervous systems. Among the data collected were the follow-
ing measures of SP concentration in cervical vagus nerves (X) and corresponding nodose ganglia
(NG), right and left sides:

28. Scheeringa and Zeanah (A-25) examined the presence of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), the
severity of posttraumatic symptomatology, and the pattern of expression of symptom clusters in
relation to six independent variables that may be salient to the development of a posttraumatic dis-
order in children under 48 months of age. The following data were collected during the course of
the study.


Wit./exper.
0 = subject witnessed but did not directly experience trauma
1 = subject directly experienced the trauma
Threat to caregiver
0 = caregiver was not threatened in the trauma
1 = caregiver was threatened in the trauma
Reexp " Reexperiencing cluster symptom count
Numb " Numbing of responsiveness/avoidance cluster symptom count
Arous " Hyperarousal cluster symptom count
FrAgg " New fears/aggression cluster symptom count


29. One of the objectives of a study by Mulloy and McNicholas (A-26) was to compare ventila-
tion and gas exchange during sleep and exercise in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). The investigators wished also to determine whether exercise studies could aid in the
prediction of nocturnal desaturation in COPD. Subjects (13 male, 6 female) were ambulatory
patients attending an outpatient respiratory clinic. The mean age of the patients, all of whom
had severe, stable COPD, was 64.8 years with a standard deviation of 5.2. Among the data col-
lected were measurements on the following variables:


Exercises for Use with the Large Data Sets Available on the Following Website:
www.wiley.com/college/daniel

1. The goal of a study by Gyurcsik et al. (A-27) was to examine the usefulness of aquatic exercise-
related goals, task self-efficacy, and scheduling self-efficacy for predicting aquatic exercise atten-
dance by individuals with arthritis. The researchers collected data on 142 subjects participating in
Arthritis Foundation Aquatics Programs. The outcome variable was the percentage of sessions
attended over an 8-week period (ATTEND). The following predictor variables are all centered val-
ues. Thus, for each participant, the mean for all participants is subtracted from the individual score.
The variables are:

GOALDIFF—higher values indicate setting goals of higher participation.
GOALSPEC—higher values indicate higher specificity of goals related to aquatic exercise.
INTER—interaction of GOALDIFF and GOALSPEC.
TSE—higher values indicate participants’ confidence in their abilities to attend aquatic
classes.
SSE—higher values indicate participants’ confidence in their abilities to perform eight tasks
related to scheduling exercise into their daily routine for 8 weeks.
MONTHS—months of participation in aquatic exercise prior to start of study.

With the data set AQUATICS, perform a multiple regression to predict ATTEND with each of the
above variables. What is the multiple correlation coefficient? What variables are significant in pre-
dicting ATTEND? What are your conclusions?

2. Rodehorst (A-28) conducted a prospective study of 212 rural elementary school teachers.
The main outcome variable was the teachers’ intent to manage children demonstrating symptoms
of asthma in their classrooms. This variable was measured with a single-item question that used
a seven-point Likert scale (INTENT, with possible responses of 1 = extremely probable to
7 = extremely improbable). Rodehorst used the following variables as independent variables to
predict INTENT:

SS = Social Support. Scores range from 7 to 49, with higher scores indicating higher perceived
social support for managing children with asthma in a school setting.
ATT = Attitude. Scores range from 15 to 90, with higher scores indicating more favorable
attitudes toward asthma.
KNOW = Knowledge. Scores range from 0 to 24, with higher scores indicating higher general
knowledge about asthma.
CHILD = Number of children with asthma the teacher has had in his or her class during his or
her entire teaching career.
SE = Self-efficacy. Scores range from 12 to 60, with higher scores indicating higher self-efficacy
for managing children with asthma in the school setting.
YRS = Years of teaching experience.
With the data TEACHERS, use stepwise regression analysis to select the most useful variables to
include in a model for predicting INTENT.

3. Refer to the weight loss data on 588 cancer patients and 600 healthy controls (WGTLOSS). Weight
loss among cancer patients is a well-known phenomenon. Of interest to clinicians is the role played
in the process by metabolic abnormalities. One investigation into the relationships among these
variables yielded data on whole-body protein turnover (Y ) and percentage of ideal body weight
for height (X ). Subjects were lung cancer patients and healthy controls of the same age. Select a
simple random sample of size 15 from each group and do the following:

(a) Draw a scatter diagram of the sample data using different symbols for each of the two groups.
(b) Use dummy variable coding to analyze these data.
(c) Plot the two regression lines on the scatter diagram. May one conclude that the two sampled
populations differ with respect to mean protein turnover when percentage of ideal weight is taken
into account?

May one conclude that there is interaction between health status and percentage of ideal body
weight? Prepare a verbal interpretation of the results of your analysis and compare your results
with those of your classmates.


